Then, when it came to giving a talk, it's
made me think about some things that
transpired between both of
our societies some decades ago. For
example, in 1957 when the Soviet Union
launched Sputnik, the world's first
man-made satellite that orbited the
earth successfully. Back in the USA,
everybody freaked out about this. They
didn't like being behind in space, and
said "Oh my god, we got to catch up. We
have to get a satellite into orbit in 90 days".
Which seems crazy and it was.
Our first attempt blew up on the launch pad.
But the second attempt succeeded, that
was January 31st 1958. It was almost a
hundred and twenty days after that
initial launch. It was pretty fast by
modern standards. Then, in April 6 1961,
Yuri Gagarin became the first human being
to orbit the Earth, and again that
made news all over the world. Everybody
was very impressed by that, and back in
the United States people were upset
because again we were behind. We were
behind in what was becoming clear was
the space race, and we didn't like that.
And what were we gonna do about it?
So in late May 1961, one month after
that flight, our president at the time,
Kennedy, made a speech to Congress saying
like, look if we're gonna catch up and
not be behind forever, we have to do
something big. We have to commit a lot of
money, a lot of resources. We're gonna go
to the Moon, right? And that was kind of a
crazy idea. And in 1962 he reiterated
this in a famous public speech and he
said, look we're gonna go to the Moon
before the decade is over, and that was crazy.
It was really crazy because we
haven't done anything remotely like that.
But lo and behold, eventually we did. So
Apollo 11 launched on July 16th 1969,
before the decade was over, and just this
year there's a very good documentary
that came out about this whole mission.
What it is? It's made of all original
footage that NASA took
during the mission, that's been sitting
away in cupboards and closets, and they
restored the footage and they sort of
made a recreation of what it was like to
live through this mission, and I'm gonna
play a short excerpt from that
documentary, just to give you a sense of
what the scale of this whole thing was like
It's a lot and it's crazy we went from
nothing to all that stuff, in something
like 12 years. Before Sputnik flew, we
didn't have much of a space program in
the United States, and in the end we had
all that stuff. And then of course, after
that we continued to do space things,
right? We made this Space Shuttle. It
seemed like a really cool thing. It's
like a ship out of science fiction. It
could like, take off and then land again
that's so great, right?. The problem is
actually most of it couldn't land, like
those tanks in the background there, and
therefore, it was very expensive to fly
and it was very unreliable. People died
on this on a couple of different
missions and we decided to stop using it
for all these reasons. So, after that if
we wanted to put people in orbit ,we had
to get a ride on the Soyuz and then from
there the trajectory of our space
program kept going downwards. And so if
you talk to somebody like me sometime
around the year 2002 or 2005, we all had
this attitude like, isn't it a shame? Like
the USA used to do all this cool stuff
in space and now we like don't really do
anything. And the science fiction future
that we visualized isn't really going to
happen, and we don't even see that
changing and but what can you do about it?
Oh well, shrug, right? That was just
everybody's attitude. But not quite
everybody right. At some point, somebody
came along who made a bunch of money on
a website and said: Hey I want to do
something about this. Despite having no
rocket experience I'm gonna start a
company to launch rockets and to do
bigger stuff than we've ever done before.
And so here's an excerpt of a video
about why he did that stuff
Elon Musk: Then there's becoming a multiplanet
species and space-faring civilization.
This is not inevitable. It's very
important to appreciate this is not
inevitable. The sustainable energy future
I think is largely inevitable, but being
a space-faring civiliazation it
definitely not inevitable. If you look at
the progress in space, in 1969 we
were able to send somebody to the moon.
1969. Then we had the Space Shuttle.
The space shuttle could only take people
to low Earth orbit. Then the Space Shuttle
retired and the United States could take
no one to orbit. But so that's the trend.
The trend it's like down to nothing
People are mistaken when they
think that technology just automatically
improves. It does not automatically
improve. It only improves if a lot of
people work very hard to make it better,
and actually it will, I think, by
itself degrade, actually. You look at
great civilizations like ancient Egypt,
and they were able to make the Pyramids, and
they forgot how to do that. And the
Romans they built these incredible
aqueducts. They forgot how to do it.
Jonatahan: So, his idea was pretty successful
and today we're like landing rockets and
we're seriously talking about doing
another moon mission as soon as the Year
2024. We'll see if that actually happens.
But really talking about it seriously
and that's a pretty good thing given
where we were not long ago. So, Elon
talked about a few things from the past
that were great achievements that have
been lost, and I want to go through a
few more of those to reiterate his point
that technology automatically degrades.
This thing here that you see is the
Lycurgus cup. This was a relic found and
dated back to the Roman Empire: 380 A.D.
And it's made of glass and this glass that
it's made of is the world's earliest
known nano material. Okay? The color of
the glass changes based on how you look
at it. Where the light source is. So,
if you're looking at it standing in
front of the glass, and the light source
is sort of over here with you, so that
you're seeing it with reflected light,
then the Goblet is green. But if light is
passing through, it the Goblet is red.
They had this in 300 A.D. right? And then
the Roman Empire fell and that knowledge
was lost until basically forever.
The way this worked was actually, you
know, it got figured out around 1990. The
glass is suffused with very small
particles of silver and gold. By very
small, I mean 50 to 70 nanometers. Which
is so small you would not be able to see
them with a physical microscope. You
would require an electron microscope to
see these particles, right?. But at some
point the Roman Empire fell and they
forgot how to do it.
A lot of craftsmanship went into this.
You can see, you know, how its hollowed
out on the inside where the little guy's
body is to give him more of a purple
sheen, as opposed to a red in the
background. And if you hear people talk
about this today or you read up on this,
they can have a dismissive attitude
toward it, like "Oh, the stupid Romans
didn't understand technology. They
probably didn't even know it was silver
and gold that made this happen. It was
probably just an accident and they made
like five of these" right? Which is
complete nonsense. Like. anybody who
actually builds things as opposed to
just writing about them, knows you do not
get a result this good without a
constant process of iteration and
refinement. You can imagine there will be
some initial accident, like maybe
somebody wanted to make glass sparkly
and they tried to put silver and gold in
it, and then they noticed a little bit of
discoloration. And they said, like, why is
that there? And maybe they pursued that.
Like, what happens when I change the
proportions? How thick should
the glass be? Like, engineering results
this good takes a long time, and what
that means is that in Rome people were
doing something that we would recognize
today as materials science. And then that
was lost. Other stuff happened. Like, in
the Byzantine Empire, they had
flamethrowers, and not like little dinky
things. They had giant pressurized
vessels in the bellies of ships that
shot out a napalm like substance out of
metal tubes that they would use to
incinerate neighboring vessels.
It was napalm-like in the sense that
water would not put this fire out,
right? It was a very serious weapon. It was
a state secret of the Byzantine Empire.
They used it to defend Constantinople
over and over again for hundreds of
years, until one day they couldn't really
do that anymore,
for whatever reason, and
this military secret just faded from
knowledge. Nobody knows how to do it now.
Obviously we've reinvented
flamethrowers, but they're different. But
this is the Antikythera mechanism, which
is named after an island in Greece where
this was found on a sunken ship. It was
just a corroded hunk of metal or a
number of corroded hunks of metal. But it
was very clear, when they were originally
discovered, that gears were involved and
over time people analyzed this. They
realized it's a mechanical calendar that
was used to say things like you know
what what year is it, what are the phases
of the Moon, where are the planets going
to be right now, when is the next Olympic
Games, right? And people have run scans on
on what is left of this and managed to
deduce what all the gears were in this
mechanism. And it's very different from
what I thought. When I first heard news
about this, I thought like oh they must
have had some cute little gear things in
Greece, that's surprising. But let me just
show you the scale of the generally
agreed upon reconstruction of what this
device actually was.
That seems like a lot of gears, right? But
wait, there's more.
So ancient Greece had that. But that is
not the picture that we have today of
ancient Greece, right? And the thing to
realize is: You don't just get here from
nothing. It's not like one day there
weren't any gears and then the next day
some guy makes this, right? You need a
whole process of science to create
something that sophisticated. And we
don't know anything about that today,
right? All of that was lost. And I could
go on and on with examples. There's a
whole bunch of things from history that
are like this. But we don't have time. I'm
just want to restate that, right now, we
live in a very privileged time. Where
technology has been in a good shape for
a long time. We see it getting better and
so we imagine that the natural course of
history is that technology always
improves,and that these moments in
history are just like little blips or
something that we heard about. But
they're not just little blips. It's
actually sort of the regular course of
world history that great achievements in
technology just get completely lost,
because the civilizations that made
those achievements fell or, you know, have
this sort of a soft fall, where they fail
to propagate the knowledge into the
future, right? Technology goes backward
all the time and not just in ancient
history, also in the modern day, right? We
lose knowledge all the time. So, I'm gonna
read an excerpt from an interview with
Bob Colewell, who was the chief
microprocessor architect at Intel for a
while. But this interview is from before
that. It was from the booming days of
Silicon Valley, when he worked at a
startup called MultiFlow. They were
trying to make a very large instruction
word processor, when that was a new
experimental idea, and they were having a
lot of problems. Like, when you try to
design the chip you're using components
from other manufacturers, and he just
couldn't get anything to work reliably.
And he was like, what what the hell, right?
So he says: Rich Lething and I made a
pilgrimage down to Texas Instruments in
Richardson, Texas and we said: "As best as
we can tell many of your chips don't
work properly. And does this come as a
surprise to you?" I half expected them to
say, "What, you're out of your mind. You've
done something wrong. Come on, you don't
know what you're doing. And go use
somebody else's chips" But no, they said
"Yeah, we know. Let me see your list" And
they looked at the list and
said: "Well, here's some more that you
don't know about". And by the way, it
wasn't just TI. Their parts were no worse
than anybody else's. Motorola's were no
good. Fairchild's were no good. They all
had this problem. And so I asked TI, how
did the entire industry fall on its face
at the same time? We are killing
ourselves trying to workaround the
shortcomings in your silicon. And the guy
said, "The first generation of transistor
logic was done by the old graybeard guys,
who really knew what they were doing. The
new generation was done by kids who are
straight out of school, who didn't know
to ask what the change in packaging
would do to inductive spikes" right? So
when you change the voltage in places on
a chip, it generates a magnetic field,
because that's just what happens. And
when those fields interact across a chip,
it's bad right. And, you know. the new
people designing these chips didn't know
to take that seriously. And that's why
technology degrades, or it's at least one
reason, right? It takes a lot of energy
and effort to communicate from
generation to generation these important
things that you need to know in order to
do a competent job making the technology.
And there are losses in that
communication process, almost inevitably.
And without this generational transfer
of knowledge, civilizations can die.
Because of technology that those
civilizations depend on degrades and
fails. So let's talk about a civilization
that fell. Actually, a whole group of
civilizations. The diagrams I'm going to
show here, are from a lecture you can
find on Youtube called "1177 BC, the year
civilization collapsed" by Eric Cline. And
we're talking about the Late Bronze Age,
which was the time of a number of
civilizations you've heard of probably.
Like the Egyptians or the Mycenaean,
Greeks, right? or the Hittites, the
Babylonians, and so this civilization or
this network of civilizations was sort
of spanning Mesopotamia and the
Mediterranean Sea. And they had developed
quite a sophisticated network of trade.
So in this graph here, each of these
points is one of the civilizations and
the lines are, you know, established
communication and trade routes
between those civilizations, and whereas
not all of them were connected to all of
the other ones, they were interconnected
enough that you could relatively
efficiently route things
from one place to another if you needed
to. And that was very important because
bronze, which the civilization depended
on for things like defense, was hard to
make back then. You had to do it by
combining copper and tin. And copper was
relatively hard to find, and was found in
places like the island of Cyprus. And tin
was also really hard to find and was
found very far away from those copper
places, like in Afghanistan. And so you
saw you somehow had to persistently ship
these things around, in order to make
your bronze, and the other things that
your society depended on. And nobody's
sure exactly what happened in this
collapse, but people believed there was
some kind of environmental stressor to
kick it off. Like, there was a huge
drought possibly, also some floods are
theorized .And this led to some people
attacking some other people. And, you know,
maybe you need to start using your ships
for defense instead of trading. And,
basically, you went from all these
flourishing civilizations, to a hundred
years later none of them were left. And
by none of them were left, I don't even
mean that like the nation-states were
gone. Like, many of the cities were burned
to the ground and the languages and
cultures don't survive, even though they
wrote by, you know, pressing things into
stone. Like, nobody was able to translate
those languages. Even today, we still
can't translate a lot of them. So, like, so
much knowledge was lost here, in this
collapse. We'll get back to it later, but
so I want to bridge this to the modern
day in some way. And my thesis for the
rest of this talk is that software is
actually in decline right now. It's in,
maybe, a soft decline that just makes
things really inconvenient for us. But it
could lead to a hard decline later on.
Because our civilization depends on
software, we put it everywhere. All our
communication system are software, our
vehicles are software. So you know, we now
have airplanes that kill hundreds of
people due to bad software and bad
software only, right?
There was no other problem with
those airplanes. Now, I don't think most
people would believe me if I say
software is in decline. It sure seems
like it's flourishing so I have to
convince you
at least that this is a plausible
perspective and that's my goal for the
rest of this talk. And what I'll say
about that is: these collapses, like we're
talking about that Bronze Age collapse,
was massive, like all these civilizations
were destroyed. But it took a hundred
years .So if you're at the beginning of
that collapse, in the first 20 years you
might think, well, things aren't as good
as they were 20 years ago, but it's fine,
we're basically the same, right? But then
you keep thinking that, you keep thinking
that. Every 20 years another couple
cities get burned to the ground, and then,
eventually, there's like nothing, right?
The Fall of the Roman Empire was about 300
years. So, if you're in the middle of a
very slow collapse like that, would you
recognize it?, would you know what it
looked like from the inside? So, of course
I expect the reply to what I'm saying to
be: "You're crazy,
software is doing great! Look at all
these internet companies that are making
all this money and changing the way that
we live, you know?" and I would say: "Yes,
that is all happening. But what is really
happening, is that software has been free
riding on hardware. For the past many
decades we've had amazing advances in
hardware technology. Computers keep
getting faster and faster. It's really
one of the greatest accomplishments in
human history, that we've somehow managed
to do that,
and software gets better in air quotes,
because it has better hardware to run on.
That's the main reason software
technology itself has not improved in
quite a while,
I claim, right? And you can say: "But look
at all these examples of cool stuff we
can do. Even in the past couple of years
so like AlphaGo was an AI that it beated
human players at Go". And you can go on,
like "Instagram or whatever app and like
make your face look like somebody else's
face, that's crazy. We didn't used to be
able to do that" And that's true. But one,
most of these again are products of
hardware being fast. Most of these cool
things that we do now are due to Machine
Learning algorithms and it,
you know, those really are relying on
quantity of computation right now to
produce impressive results. It's hard to
imagine being able to train AlphaGo 20
years ago on the computers we had at
that time, right? So it's not that... there are
software technology improvements here,
right? Machine Learning algorithms have
legitimately gotten better. But there're
two things to say about that. Well, the
main thing to say about it, I will say, is
just that it's a minority of actual
software technology, right? So, of the
volume of things that we run, the thing
that runs the Machine Learning algorithm
that produces the actual impressive
result is a very small piece of the
program. It's actually really simple, once
you understand the math, and, especially
if you don't have to train it, if you
just have to use it, right? And so when
you take an app on your phone like that,
that does something funny with your
picture, The part of it that does the
thing that we think is cool and really
value. That piece of software is
tremendously simple, compared to all the
stuff about like, loading the bitmap for
your face or responding to user input
events, right? That part of the software
is huge and complicated and is the part
that's kind of falling apart. So I would
characterize software as having small
local technological improvements, like
Machine Learning, with overall inertia or
degradation in the rest of the field. And
we're very impressed by the improvements,
though, right? And let me illustrate the
degradation parts as best I can and it's
to say that we simply don't expect
software to work anymore. And I'm not
sure when this happened, you know.
Computers always had a reputation for
being a little bit funny. But, you know,
if you go back many decades ago, it was
generally due to like, not being user
friendly or hard to understand how to
use it. But today, if you're using a
program and it does something wrong,
you're just like "yeah it's software,
restart it whatever". And that didn't used
to be. And if our standards are shrinking
over time, how low can they shrink before
it becomes unsustainable? So, I decided to
say, you know, I want to quantify or
illustrates
how much I put up with this from day to
day. So from now on I'm just gonna take a
screenshot every time any piece of
software that I use has an obvious bug
or, you know, unintuitive or incorrect
piece of behavior. And, well, I write it,
right? When I decided that I was working
on my compiler in the command line and
the console that I use, after a while,
just start saying "attempt to index a
null value" in the prompt, because it's
written in Lua for some reason. Then, I go
to Emacs and I'm working on my code and
Emacs is set to reload files that have
been modified and that used to work fine,
but at some point they broke it so that
it reloads the file too early and
doesn't get the whole thing and half of
it is cut off. And I have to, like,
manually reset that every time it
happens. Then I go to Gmail and I'm going
to send an email to the rest of the team
about some graphics stuff, making
decisions about what to do, and I copy a
line of a previous email and paste it
into the reply box. And then I start
typing my reply and it goes into like a
three character wide column over here,
because somehow they've managed to
reproduce all the kinds of stupid
Microsoft Word formatting bugs that
everyone was frustrated with in the 90s
and 2000's, now those are in Gmail. And I
don't know how to fix it. Like, you fight
with it for a while to get it to stop
happening, you have to like delete
something invisible, I don't know. Very
annoying. So then I say, okay I'm gonna
get some real programming done. I go to
Visual Studio and I say I'm going to
type in my command-line arguments up
there. And, as soon as I do that, we get
this box that says "hey, collection was
modified, enumeration option may not, your
operation may not execute" Why? I don't
exactly know why. That's a problem, like
I'm just telling it, a string, we're not
even trying to do anything with the
string. It's just like, save this for
later. For when we want to run the
program, but apparently that's too hard,
right? And this is far from the only
problem with Visual Studio. Visual Studio
has many many bugs, but this is the
funniest one. Because it's so simple what
I'm trying to do and it can't do it all
the time. This, I don't know what
percentage of the time this happens. It's
probably like 5%, I don't know, 4%. So then
I decide to break off. Blow off some
steam and play some games. So let me
download a game on the
Epic store, but we're unable to start the
download for some reason. So maybe I'll
go to Steam, because that's a more
reliable, longer-lasting store. And I'm
able to actually download a game, but
then when I go to the install window
it's just like a black window and I have
to restart Steam to play the game. Then I
managed to play the game and then I all
tap out for a second to check something
and then now full screen is all messed
up and the game's like up in the corner
of a window, right? And then I have to
restart the game to get full screen
again. And then I'm watching some
Counter Strike there was a really good
match between Cloud 9 and Luminosity
gaming about a month ago. And, but for the
entire match there was a mysterious sixth
player on the cloud 9 side called
undefined. Up in the corner there. Let me
zoom in on that map for you
Counter Strike fans. Undefined is on
the left. A hundred thousand people were
watching this match and it was there the
whole time. I was thinking about a game I
like called Ultima 4, so I went to this
website that had the map. And the map was
like screwed up because he was like
wrapping into extra lines, so I opened a
different browser to see it correctly. I
needed to get a visa to come to the
Russian Federation, so I go to the visa
site, and I start typing my information
and, maybe, I typed out my phone number. I
put the plus one and it didn't like it
or something. So it says phone number is
invalid over here but I couldn't fix the
phone number no matter what I put in. It
wouldn't accept it because whatever the
variable was for phone number is invalid
would never get reset. So I had to, like
stop the application, close the website.
Like, clear my cookies go back and
reapply in order to be able to. And be
very careful when I was typing my phone
number. There are just so many of these. All
of this was within a couple days. Like, I
didn't have to try hard to find these,
right? I just had to stop collecting them.
But then, I come here and as if to give
me more examples in this talk. So here in
this hotel where I've been writing this
talk for a couple days, they have this
software controlled heating and lighting
system. Where it's like, you kind of push
the non button buttons and things happenm
and some percentage of the time, not all
the time, when I turn the air
conditioning on or off, the phone rings.
It's not a full ring even, it's just like
a little blue bubble and then it stops.
But I know it's not intentional, because
it doesn't happen every time. And I am
NOT making this up.
this actually happens in my room, right?
Now, ok, and then for this talk two
hours ago,
I was working at the last minute to make
a diagram and I downloaded a fully
legitimate licensed Creative Cloud
Photoshop to my machine. The first thing
I do is go to  File, New Document. BAM, the new
document extension could not be loaded
because of a program error, right? And so
my whole point, though, is we are not
surprised by any of this. My other point
is that it's getting worse over time. So
try this everyday yourself because we've
gotten used to it. I didn't even think it
would be as much when I had the idea to
record this. I didn't think it would be
as much as it was. Try counting for
yourself just everyday, just make a
little list of all these things and I
think you'll be surprised how many there
are. I don't know if anyone knows what
this phrase means: "five nines". I'm sure a
lot of people don't. This used to be a
very common phrase in the 1990s and
2000s when people wanted to sell you
software or a hardware system. What it
means is this system is up and working,
and available 99.999% of the time, right?
Four nines, would be ninety-nine point
nine nine whatever. And we don't use this
anymore. I think, in part, because the
number of nines would be going down. And
we can't make it go up again and nobody,
well, certain parties, don't seem to care.
So I was, you know, working on this speech
for about the past week and twice,
once when I was asleep on the airplane
and once the other night in the room, my
laptop just rebooted while it was in
sleep mode and just killed all my
programs and stuff. I guess cuz it was an
update, maybe it wasn't an update. Maybe
it was just the operating system failing.
But I think it was an update. So that
automatically takes my laptop down to
like three 9s or less, less than three
nines. And if the laptop is less than
three 9s nothing running on it could be
three or four or five nines, right? So
we've even lost the rhetoric of quality
that we used to have, ¿right? and so if you
say this,
the software is buggy, then people like
web programmers or Hacker News people or
whatever, will say "Yeah, we know. But the
market won't pay for it, right? Like, we
could make software better. But that
takes time and money to fix the bugs and
all that stuff and our client won't pay
for it or the market punishes that,
because you take longer to get to market"
And that's true to some extent. I could
definitely argue with some parts of it.
But here's the thing that I'm thinking
today. If you haven't seen an entire
industry produce robust software for
decades, what makes you think they
actually can? right? They're saying we
could do it if we wanted to, but we're
just totally not. But, why would I believe
that they actually can do it, right?
Because, like we've said there's this
generational transmission of knowledge
factor that I don't think is being
passed along, right? So I think the
knowledge of how to make things less
buggy is lost. And even the knowledge of
a technology company has changed and
again this illustrates the difference
between software and hardware. Hardware
technology companies used to be a place
that makes advanced materials or defiant,
you know, designs new radar or like does
something but you didn't use to be able
to do before, right?
So now in Silicon Valley and as
nearly as I could tell around the world.
a software quote tech company is just a
company that does stuff with computers,
and is then hoping to stumble into a
market niche that it can exploit. And the
point is the market niche. The point
isn't the software, and the point is
especially not designing higher tech
software that pushes the threshold of
technology forward. Which is what
hardware companies always used to do. And
so, we've even corrupted the words
tech company, right? Ok, so now I want to
bring it a little closer to what we do.
There's been this sequence of
abstraction that we've gone through as
programmers over the decades, right?
Originally, you had to program your
computer in machine language, then there
was assembly language, then we had the
sequence of
higher level languages, like Fortran and C
or C++. And nowadays we have stuff like
C# or Haskell or JavaScript, that
are even further away from the machine.
And the justification for this is like,
look that we're working at a higher
level of abstraction, the higher your
level of abstraction, the more you work
you get done, because you don't have to
worry about scheduling machine
instructions and stuff. So, we're really
being smart and we're saving effort. And
I think that's actually true. Like, I
don't think we want to program things in
assembly language. That's a waste of time.
But somewhere through this chain, it
becomes wrong. And that's how people
are wrong a lot of the times, right? Like,
you start out by being right and then
you extrapolate it too far into wrong
territory. But the important thing to all
of this is that we only see one side of it.
We see that we're being smart and
saving effort, and we don't see the flip
side of all of these things. Which is
that there's a corresponding loss of
capability, right? Because I don't program
in assembly anymore, I no longer am able
to program in assembly, right? if I don't,
you know, if I use languages that
are too high level, and have a little bit
lazy, as people often are, I don't know
where my variables live in memory or
what they look like or even how remotely
how big they are, right? I certainly don't
know what the CPU is doing in response
to the code that I've written. I may be
scared to use non-managed languages,
because the very idea of memory
allocation just seems too hard and scary.
Or even if I'm a person who programs in
a non managed language, maybe I'm afraid
of pointers and start generating this
cult of of being afraid of pointers and
what to do about that, like the modern
C++ people do, right? And so the rhetoric
that we have is I'm being smart,
I shouldn't have to do the low-level stuff,
right? But part of the reality is the
loss of capability that corresponds to
those choices, and both of those things
can be true at the same time. I'm not
saying that we're not being smart by
going up some level, well a little bit. I mean
there's a problem, which is at the point
of going up all these levels is supposed
to be to make everybody more productive.
But programmers are not more productive
now than they used to be.
In fact, it looks to me like productivity
per programmer is approaching zero. And,
if that's true, then where is the proof
that going up this ladder of abstraction
further and further is really helping?. So,
the way to at least, you know, get a feel
for this is you look at a company, like
you know Twitter or Facebook. It employs
a lot of people. And you look at their
product and you say, how much does that
product change from year to year? right?
How much functionality is added to
Twitter year after year? How much
functionality is added to Facebook? It's
not that much, right?
And then just divide by the number of
engineers at the company, right? Which is
thousands or tens of thousands sometimes.
That's a very small number when you do
that division, right? It's it's gonna be
pretty close to zero. So, what's going on?
Right? And to illustrate again the
difference in productivity, and that it's
not just me that thinks this, I'm gonna
show an excerpt from an interview with
Ken Thompson, who is the original author
of the UNIX operating system. And he's
talking about the time at Bell
Laboratories when he first started
making UNIX on a computer that by modern
standards had like no software at all, right?
Ken Thompson: "(At) some point I realized, without
knowing it up until that point, that I
was three weeks from an operating system.
With three programs one a week: An editor, I needed
to write code. I needed an
assembler, to turn the code into language
I could run. And I needed a little kernel,
kind of an overlay, call it an operating
system. And luckily, right at that moment
my wife went on a three-week vacation
to take my my one-year-old, roughly, to
visit my in-laws who were in California.
Disappeared, all alone and one week, one
week, one week, and we had Unix".
Brian Kernighan: "Yeah, I think programmers aren't quite as
productive these days as they used to be" Yeah, he says
programmers aren't productive these days
like that, and everybody laughs. But it's
funny, but it's not funny, right?
It's really not funny when you
consider, like, how much waste there must
be in the difference between how
productive people are and how productive
they could be, if everything wasn't so
messed up, right? So I've made a case that
robustness of software is declining,
productivity of programmers is declining.
So, if you're gonna say that actual
technology of software is somehow
advancing, it seems contrary to those two
facts, right? So I think the argument that
software is advancing is clearly false.
Except again maybe in tiny local
bubble-like areas. So, now why is it so
bad? Why is it so hard to write programs?
Why are we so miserable when we try to
write programs today? It's because we're
adding too much complication to
everything, right? And I have a way that I
think about this called: "you can't just", right?
When there's all kinds of things
that you used to be able to do on a
computer that you can't do today, right?
So today you can't just copy a program
from one computer to another and have it
work, right? You need to have an installer.
Or like a flatpack on Linux, or like
containers if you're a server Hacker News
guy, right? And so people think this
is cool. Now we have containers, that's an
advantage or it's an advancement of
software technology. All containers are
doing is get us back to the 1960s, when
we didn't have to do any of this stuff.
Except it's actually not because it's
adding all these steps that you have to
do, right? And things you have to maintain.
So now let's think of it for a second,
like, why do you need an installer to
install software? Is it because of the
CPU? Not really, like, imagine you have
well, you know, imagine you have some x64
machine code and don't worry about how
you got it into a computer's memory. But
you just got it there, and you just jump
to it. You set the program counter to
that code. That code is going to do the
same thing on a Windows PC, as it does on
a Mac, as it does on a Linux machine.
It does on an Xbox as it does on a
Playstation 4 all, right? Because all of
those systems use compatible CPUs. So,
what's the installer for? The Installer
is to get around the incompatibilities
that we added at the OS layer. Which is
this immensely complex thing that we
mostly don't want, actually. And so, we
tend to think about operating systems as
adding capabilities to a system, to
the system of the hardware and the
software. But they also remove
capabilities, like, compatibility, right?
And it's often very arbitrary, and it it
doesn't get any worse, than I think it
does for us today when it comes to
shading languages. Anyone who ships 3D
engines is going to know what I'm
talking about. So it used to be that if
you wanted to compile a program for many
platforms, you could write it in some
portable language like C or C++, and you
might have to do some little if Def's to
modify it for the different platforms.
But you could do that and it's mostly
the same program. Today you can't do that
because we've decided, if you're running
a shader it needs to be in a different
programming language on every single
platform even if the hardware is the
same, right? So if you have an x86 CPU, and
an NVIDIA GPU, then on one OS you need to
write your shader in metal shading
language and on another OS you need to
write in an HLSL, right? And they're
different, even though they're the same,
and so you either have to rewrite
everything N times, where N is large, or
you have to start using Auto translation
systems to rewrite your shaders and
those come with a lot of complexity and
annoyance and bugs. And why, though? A
shader is a simpler program than the old
programs that we used to write. But why
have we made it harder to build a
simpler program? It doesn't make any
sense.
We don't care, righ? So the list of
things you can't just do: You can't just
copy a program. You can't just statically
link. You can't just draw pixels to the
screen. Oh my god, the number of steps you
have to do to draw a pixel today is
crazy. You can't just write a shader. You
can't just compile a program on Windows
without a manifest, and stuff. And on
these new closed platforms, you can't
just run an executable,
unless it's signed through this, like,
whole process, right? And all of these
things, and many more that are not on
this list add friction, bugs, time,
engineering time, and headspace that
keeps us from thinking about interesting
things to actually do. A couple of
examples of this, that illustrate this
isn't going to end anytime soon have
entered my own life. So one of my side
projects is a compiler, and to compile
programs you need to link them against
libraries on people's machine. Like, for
example, the Windows SDK and the C
runtime library. And now different
versions of things, install those in
different places on the machine. And so
you have to like be able to find them to
do the linking. And rather than make this
easy today Microsoft gives you a program
called vswhere which you can find on
github. And the job of vswhere is just
to tell you where these libraries are
installed. It is more than 7,000 lines of
source code in 70 files, ok? And they
didn't even try to bundle it as a
library. It's a standalone program. So
what they're thinking now is you can't
just make a compiler that's a standalone
program. It's obviously going to be a
suite of applications, and once you have
a suite of applications, what's one more?
What's like a little vswhere we're hanging
out in there, right? They're not even
thinking that this would be bad. It's
crazy. I made my own version of this
based on some other people's work and
got it down to like 500 lines of code.
Which is still way too many to basically
ask two questions, that should be two
lines of code, right? So multiplier of 250.
And then, in also in the programming
language world, there's this thing called
Language Server Protocol, that is pretty
much the worst thing that I've ever
heard of. And there are just proponents
of this all over. They're building
systems for this right now that are
going to be living on your computer
tomorrow or today already maybe. And as
far as I can tell, it's basically a more
complicated slower way to do libraries.
So, say you've got an editor for some
programming language and you want to be
able to do stuff that we've been doing
for decades already, like look up the
declaration of an identifier by clicking
on it, or
tooltips that say like what type is this
value, right? Well they say the way you
should do that is you know you have your
editor and then it's it's a hassle to
make plugins, this is the made-up problem,
it's a hassle to make plugins for all
these different things. So in order to
standardize, you're going to run a server
on your machine and then your editor
talks over a socket to the server and
the server talks back and gives you the
answer, right? Which has now turned your
single program into a distributed system.
But the the flaw in this whole line of
thinking, that none of these people seems
to actually, like, think about at all, is
that there's nothing special about, like,
looking up the location of an identifier in your...
That's just an API like we
have all the time for everything. So the
obvious next step, if you're saying that
we should architect our API's like this,
is to do this for other tasks, right? So
now your editors or whatever program is
going to be talking to multiple of these
things, and now if you ever want to
author anything for this, you now have to
author and debug components of a
distributed system where state is not
located in any central place, and we all
know how fun that is, righ?t But of course
libraries are not that simple, right?
Libraries use other libraries, so what
happens at that point, if you're running
all these servers on your system? and who
don't, you know, some of them are going to
like go down, and like have to restart,
and, people, are synchronizing with each
other. No, this is a disaster, right? And
people are actively building this right
now. And meanwhile, while we're spending
all this time over complicating stuff
that we used to be able to do in 1960, in
the games industry, we're not even able
to do the things that we've needed to do
forever. So, like today games can't run
consistently in full-screen, as you see
from the screenshot, and I don't wish to
bag on that particular game, because we
all put a lot of engineering work into
trying to make our game run in
full-screen. It's kind of embarrassing
like, why, right? Also, it's actually
impossible on a PC right now to render
at a smooth frame rate. It is simply not
possible no matter what you do. Alen
Ladavac of Croteam has
a talk at GDC and a paper about what you
actually would need to do this. We just
don't even have that capability which is
insane, right? And yet we're spending all
this effort on other things, and so this
complication that's introduced into all
of our systems and not only makes our
lives difficult in the present when
we're trying to build something, it
accelerates the loss of knowledge over
time, right? So first of all there's more
to know when things are more complicated,
and so if you talk about a job spread
among many people, each individual person
knows a smaller percent of what they
need to do. They have a less global view
which makes it harder to do good work,
right? And harder to transmit their
knowledge on to people in the future.
Another thing that happens is that deep
knowledge becomes replaced by trivia. So
deep knowledge might be a general
concept, like, here's how cache coherency
works and that enables software to run
fast on, like, different processors and
stuff. And trivia is something like, well
this sprite in Unity doesn't display
properly for some reason, but we know we
can fix it if you open this panel and
toggle this boolean, and that fixes it
for a while. But then some weeks later,
for random reasons, the boolean
mysteriously untoggles. So just make sure
to check that before you ship and it'll
be fine, right? And the reason that's
trivial, is not only because it doesn't
apply to anything else in the world. But
it's also going to be outdated in six
months when the next Unity comes out. And
it's just offensive that we're spending
our brainpower on these things, okay? And
the third thing that happens is good
information is drowned by noise. So if
something is really hard to understand,
the percentage of people who put the
effort into understanding it is going to
be small, and the harder it is, the
smaller that percentage. And so if you
ask people, or you learn at a school,  or
you search on the web, your probability
of getting a bad answer to the problem
is much higher for more complicated
things, than it is for less complicated
things. And so the complication
propagates and magnifies. So let's get
back to this collapse of civilization
stuff, right? The more complexity we put
in our system, the less likely we are to
survive a disaster, right? Because we have
to maintain all that complexity. We're
acting right now,
like we believe that the upper limit of
what we can handle is infinity amount of
complexity, right?
But I don't think that makes any sense.
So what's the upper limit? how would we
decide how much complexity we can handle?
And that's different from what people
today actually can handle. So if you have
an engineer who can hold a whole system
in his head that's really complicated
and work on it. When that guy quits and
needs to pass on his job to somebody new,
he's not necessarily going to be able to
communicate all that, right? So the amount
of complexity we can sustain over time,
is less than the amount of complexity
that individuals can do today, right? So
why am I talking about this at a games
conference, right? Like, everybody knows
that games aren't serious and whatever,
right? But video games at least used to
be about maximizing what the machine
could do, and, like, really impressing the
people playing the game. And maximizing
the machine means you have to understand
the Machine very well. And that
correlates with robust software, because
if you understand the machine well,
you're less likely to make the kind of
bugs that come from misunderstanding.
There's anti correlations with robust
software too, but, anyway, now we're not
really about that so much. Especially
talking about independent developers.
People are shifting to Unity and Unreal
and must, right? Not very many people
write their own engines anymore. So we
have entire generations of programmers
who have grown up learning to program by,
you know, making little C# snippets
that just plug into other parts of Unity
or something. And they've never written
something systemic, and they've never
written something low-level. Which on the
one hand is fine, like, I'm not saying we
shouldn't do that. Because there's a
degree to which it's smart, it reduces
development time, right? It helps you ship
your game sooner. But, like I said before,
there's a flip side. That flip side is
giving up the capability of doing the
other thing. Giving up the knowledge of
how to do the other thing. So I don't
think it's bad in isolation if a lot of
people make games where they just put
snippets into Unity, right? But if
everybody
does that, then nobody knows how to do
anything but that. And then after a while
what's gonna happen? Because we're
assuming that we'll just be able to use
these engines forever. But Unity and
Unreal were created in an environment
where there were lots of people at games
companies making engines all the time,
right? And that's where they hired people
from, and when there's no longer a
natural way to learn how to make engines,
because nobody does it, where are Unity
and Unreal gonna hire employees from to
maintain those engines that everybody's
using? Right? And you know to the extent
that they can hire people, is the quality
of people gonna go down because they
have less experience. It just takes a
long time to ramp up, right? So then maybe
at some point, well, certainly at some
point there's not enough people to make
a new competing engine. But maybe even at
some point you can't really maintain the
old ones and they just keep decaying
over time, that can happen. And so the way
I used to think about game developers is,
kind of like the Foundation in the
Asimov books where we kind of knew how
to really program computers and, you know,
also some other kinds of programmers
like embedded systems people, and high
performance computing people, all sort of
knew what was going on with computers
and after the rest of software just kind
of decays and falls apart, we still have
the knowledge and we could bring it back
and give it to people. But I'm not really
sure that that's gonna happen now.
Because I just don't know, I mean, I don't
know if there will be enough of us
doing low-level work, or even people
doing high-level work who understand
what's happening at the low-level while
they do the high-level, right? So, maybe
there needs to be a second Foundation.
Spoiler alert for anyone who hasn't read
the book. So back in the Bronze Age, right?
One of the reasons those civilizations
disappeared, is that the way things were
set up was that reading and writing was
only done by a small elite class who
went, you know, went to school for years,
and this was protected. The public
couldn't know how to do this, they
probably mostly didn't want to know. And
because those skills weren't widespread
they were fragile, so when the society
was disrupted they weren't continued
because not enough people could carry it
forward. Today,
almost nobody knows what's happening
on a CPU, right? That skill is not
widespread.
So it's fragile and so do we think that
this immensely complicated thing that
we've built today is somehow more robust
than what they had in the Bronze Age
with just making bronze, because that
didn't survive. If that didn't survive,
why do we think what we're doing now is
gonna survive? Right? And we might have
some similar stressors, we might have
some climate change issues, right? Or you
might have some new stuff, like what
happens if there's so many cyber attacks
that countries just start cutting each
other off the internet? Right? Now lots of
people in lots of countries can't get to
StackOverflow to figure out how to copy
and paste their code, so their code
production is impacted, right? or what
happens if China just says: "you know what?,
we're just gonna keep all the CPUs, now
we don't want to sell you any"? What's
gonna happen, right? None of these things
in isolation, I don't think, will bring
down civilization. But it can certainly
hit the system with a big shock. And if
the system is too complex, it may not
survive that shock very well. And so I'm
just trying to say, like Elon Musk was
saying, the technology by itself will
degrade and we need to, as soon as we can,
start working against this, right? At
every level that we have access to, we
have to simplify the hardware we're
running on. We have to simplify the
operating systems we use, the libraries
we use, the application code we write, the
communication systems we do this over,
like the internet. We have to simplify
how we compile, debug, and distribute
software. And we have to simplify how
people interface with software. And that
sounds like really a lot of stuff to do,
but the good news is that all of these
things are so ridiculously complicated
right now, that it's very easy to find
things to improve. Simplifying any of
these systems only requires the will to
do it, rather than a taste you have to
have a taste to recognize how
complicated things are and how they
would be better if they weren't so
complicated, ok? Now a lot of people are
probably like ok, whatever. Software is
complicated, but I don't believe
civilization is gonna collapse or
anything. And so you know maybe, maybe, but
I would say if
you're a programmer, you should care
about this anyway because even just your
own personal future. Like programmers are
not that happy today, we're often very
grumpy, and the reason we're grumpy is
because we're doing stupid things all
the time, instead of interesting things.
And that's not gonna get better if we
keep doing things the way that we do
them, right? So you personally will be
happier if we change the way we do
things, and if we do things the way they
are now, maybe the future is deeply
mediocre in the way that America's space
future was going to be deeply mediocre.
Now, even if you just want to survive as
just an individual game developer like
you're thinking look I just want to get
my game done
I want to ship it, I want it to succeed
financially, even if you just want to
have a very limited scope of concern
like that,
removing complexity is still the right
short-term play, even if it doesn't seem
like it. I'm sure we all are very
familiar with cases like, well we're
gonna ship in five months and we're
having a lot of problems with this
particular system, it's really buggy, you
know. It loses people's work all the time,
whatever. But we just have to stick with
it for five months and it'll be passed,
it'll be history and that's good because
rewriting it would be a lot of effort. It
might delay shipping, and so we're gonna
stick with it, we're gonna stick out the
five months and that's always wrong.
Because always what happens is it takes
two years to ship instead of five months,
and so the amount that you suffered from
the system is way worse than it
otherwise would have been. And maybe in
fact, that system was a large ingredient
in why it took so long to ship. So
simplify and in simplifying your own
code to solve your own local problems
you're also building institutional
knowledge about how to simplify. Which
sounds really basic, but I would claim we
don't even really have that anymore.
Here's some references of videos you can
watch if you're interested in this kind
of topic: Casey Muratori video "The 30
million line problem".
Samo Burja video: "Civilizations:
institutions, knowledge and the future". And
the
Eric Cline's video which I showed
snapshots of earlier: "1177 BC, the year
civilization collapsed". And that's all I
have to say for now. Thank you for your
time.